the ancient taoist text zhongzhou
describes litzu as the sage who rode the
wind with an admirable indifference to
external things
and thus in his lightness he was free
from all desires to pursue the things
that supposedly make us happy
li yoko also known as litzu or master li
is attributed as the author of the
eponymous ancient
taoist text even though there is a
debate among scholars
whether or not litzu truly existed as a
person
the text is considered the third most
important scripture in taoism
after the dao de jing and the zhuangzu
the litzu
contains many stories with philosophical
themes
like the nature of reality the purpose
of life
and the workings of the mind one theme
that runs like a thread
through this ancient scripture is the
tendency of human beings to stand
in their own way and thereby sabotaging
a spontaneous effortless mode of living
dominated by a mind burning with desire
anxiously trying to control the
uncontrollable
we've become unwilling and unable to let
the universe run its natural course
as we have exchanged spontaneity for
fear
and the more we fight the universe the
more painful our lives become
as things inevitably change in
directions we don't like
but how can we re-embark the natural
flow of life
what if we dare to let go of our
attachments and desires
our fears and inhibitions and become as
light as a feather like
liter this video explores the taoist
philosophy
of lietze on how to let go and ride the
[Music]
wind
the second book of the lit tells how
this taoist
sage let go of the weight of the world
and became so
light that he was able to ride the wind
and float with a cloud
this happened after a period of
disciplining his body and mind
during which he let go of conceptions of
right and wrong
after years of practice litzu
experienced that a barrier between
himself
and the outside world had disappeared as
well as the heaviness of his bones and
flesh
without knowing it i was being carried
by the wind
he stated drifting here and there i did
not know whether i rode on the wind
or the wind rode on me and quote
now riding the wind isn't to be taken
literally
it's a metaphor for a mental state that
we could experience according to the
taoist
sages in which we move lightly through
life as if we're floating
we ride the wind when external
circumstances don't weigh us down
because we don't resist them but live in
harmony with them
lautzer and zhuangzi also pointed to
this state
in their unique ways zhuangzi tells us
to let our minds wander
in the pure and simple to be one with
the infinite and to let all things take
their course
lauter describes it as becoming one with
the dust
and that those who do cannot be
benefited nor harmed
approached nor alienated made noble nor
suffer this grace
imagine how light life would be if
nothing in the universe
could harm us
we can find a beautiful description of
this state of riding the wind
in the second book of the liatsu which
tells us about a legendary yellow
emperor who suffered ill health
and restlessness after ruling the
country for many years
for years he had pushed himself
anxiously governing the country to the
greatest
detail but when he decided to take a
break and
retired from his duties he indulged in
the greatest pleasures to satisfy
the senses but these modes of life
left him exhausted and jaded the yellow
emperor stated
i pampered myself too much and then
pushed myself too hard
no wonder i lost my health and my inner
peace
end quote so he decided to distance
himself
from his imperial duties and stay away
from sensual pleasures that he had
previously indulged in
he retreated to his private quarters to
engage
in what the taoists call the fasting of
the heart
this refers to the art of freeing
oneself from earthly desires
so the body synchronizes with the
natural course of
things and thus for three months the
yellow emperor
abstained from intervention in
government and subdued the census
but it seems that he wanted results too
quickly
mind you that it took lit so many many
years before he was able to ride the
wind
so was it realistic to expect results so
fast the yellow emperor had worn himself
out after a relatively short time of
isolation
exhausted he fell asleep during the day
and dreamed about a journey to a far
away kingdom
this kingdom had no ruler it simply went
on by itself
its people didn't have cravings and
desires outside of their instincts
and weren't attached to life nor averse
to death
they were without preference and
prejudice hence
love and hate didn't occur and things
like attraction
repulsion wanting disliking gain
and loss were all alien to these people
who seemed to be consistently unaffected
by external circumstances and it was as
if they moved about like god
i quote water had no power to drown them
nor fire to burn cuts and blows caused
them neither injury nor pain scratching
or tickling
could not make them itch they be strode
in the air
as though treading on solid earth they
were cradled in space
as though resting in a bed end quote
after his dream the yellow emperor felt
enlightened
he told his ministers that he now
comprehended the way
but also understood that the way cannot
be perceived
by the senses nor explained by words
he realized that one cannot become
enlightened by conscious
thinking and effort but that is
something that happened spontaneously
in his case in a dream which occurred
after he stopped trying
great orderliness followed in the empire
and when a yellow emperor passed away
the people mourned his death for 200
years
the question is of course how can one
become as light as a taoist
sage and ride the wind the second book
of liatsu
gives us several hints on how to pull
this off
however there's a paradoxical nature to
it on one end
there's a certain practice involved to
let go of earthly desires
as well as the numerous categories and
ideas created by the mind
on the other end enlightenment seems to
happen suddenly
in the case of litzu it took years but
the yellow emperor was enlightened after
just a couple of months in both cases
the change occurred when
during their practice they reached a
state of non-practice
so this sudden spontaneous moment when
one's body ceases to be heavy
and one begins to float along with the
wind like the seeds of a dandelion
is aligned with a taoist idea of doing
without doing
or non-action it's only when we stop
striving
stop making effort quit going somewhere
stop
fighting against what is that we get
where we want to be
in the flow state in which we float
along with nature's current entirely
instead of resisting it this according
to lautzer is how one achieves a mastery
of the world
i quote one who seeks knowledge
learns something new every day one who
seeks the dao
unlearns something new every day less
and less remains
until you arrive at non-action when you
arrive at non-action
nothing will be left undone mastery of
the world
is achieved by letting things take their
natural course
you cannot master the world by changing
the natural way
end quote liutsu explained to his
disciple a man named yin
cheng what he went through before he
became as light as a feather
he mentioned that after he let go of the
notions of right and wrong
there was no barrier between himself and
the outside world
so it seems that he stopped experiencing
the separateness
that was previously created by the mind
and that it's a sense of separateness
that causes us to feel heavy
and suffer one day litzu asked the
taoist
sage ventsu why an enlightened person
cannot be drowned by water
nor burned by fire wentzu explained
that even though we separate things
based on their external features
everything is fundamentally the same as
everything comes
from the same origin so when we cease to
see ourselves separated from water
it won't drown us and when we cease to
see ourselves separated from fire
it won't burn us hence the man who
danced in the fire
said what are rocks what are flames i
don't know what you're talking about
like the story about riding the wind
these examples can be used as metaphors
for how we can free ourselves from being
affected by the world around us
again these shouldn't be taken too
literally and deeper meaning can be
found
if we read the whole second book which
tells us about the many miracles that
people
are capable of when they are in the flow
state and also
which is perhaps even more important how
people tend to lose
these abilities a farmer named chang
jumped from the highest cliffs without
breaking a bone
obtained jewels from the deepest rivers
and rescued bundles of silk
out of a burning building he did all of
this in pure spontaneity without
hesitation or fear
and desire for profit or a good
reputation among his kinsmen
only when he started thinking about the
risks he discovered what it's like to be
afraid
and began to doubt his capabilities
hence
he decided to never do these things
again
so when farmer sheng jumped into the
arena of life without reluctance
he wasn't held back by doubt because he
had nothing to gain or lose
he embarked on a natural flow of life
and just
did what he did but from the very moment
that his mind took over
he was standing in his own way anxious
about the terrible fate he could meet at
the end of the river's stream
he started holding onto rocks and
branches and thus his body became a
heavy burden
as opposed to the weightlessness he
experienced when he still flowed along
with a stream
or as philosopher allen watts stated
when reflecting on lieuten
what is this then weightlessness it
means partly
that you're not moving around in
constant opposition to yourself
most people move in constant opposition
to themselves because they are afraid
that if they don't oppose themselves all
the time something awful
will happen and quote
litzer shows us that only when we
transcend their duality of life
things like gain and loss attraction and
repulsion
wonderful and awful we can become truly
indifferent
and start acting for no other reason
than the action itself
because what's to fear when the outcome
is irrelevant
when we achieve this state we don't swim
in the water
but the water swims us and we aren't
burned by fire but
we become the burning itself and before
we know it
on a stormy day we may suddenly start
riding the wind
thank you for watching
[Music]
you